Howdy everyone, welcome to this week's episode of No Such Thing as a Fish. I have a couple
of very important announcements to say. In fact, we have them because Andy's here as
well. Hello. Hello Andy. But yes, we have a couple of very important announcements to
make. The first one is that today's episode has a very special guest and that guest is
Ella Alshamahi. Now, regular listeners of No Such Thing as a Fish will know who Ella is.
She is an explorer, a paleoanthropologist, evolutionary biologist, general smart cookie
and very good friend of ours. And we love having her on the show. It's always an absolute
riot when she comes on. And the important thing to tell you about that is that she has
a new series out. It is called Human and it is on the BBC iPlayer right now if you're
in the UK. But if you're not in the UK, fear not. Because if you're in the USA, it will
be on PBS from Wednesday the 17th of September, which is actually a couple of days ago. So
if you go to the PBS app, you will be able to find that in the US. And believe it or
not is also coming to Australia, India and Scandinavia soon. That show is called Human.
It's all about the history of Homo sapiens. It's absolutely fantastic just as Ella is
herself. Yeah, it's great. We're lucky to have had her time, frankly. And our second
exciting announcement is that we are doing a live show at Cheltenham, the Cheltenham
Literary Festival. Oh, yeah, it's going to be posh. It's going to be wordy. We're going
to be talking book book stuff with big word. No, it's going to be great. We're going to
be doing the show at Cheltenham on the 16th of October. Our special guest is going to
be Rachel Paris, who's absolutely terrific. It's an 8pm ticket to selling fast. So if
you live within a 200 mile radius of Cheltenham, this is your chance to see us this year. We
would love to see you. So just get your tickets and no such thing as a fish.com/live. If you
live more than 200 miles away, there are such things as aeroplanes and Bristol Airport is
just a short drive away. So take on some of this show. No, honestly, it's going to be
a great show. We're really looking forward to it. And like Andy says, tickets are available
at no such thing as a fish.com. Anyway, please sit back, relax and enjoy this week's episode
of no such things as a fish with Ella Alshamahi. Okay, on with the podcast.
Hello, and welcome to another episode of no such thing as a fish, a weekly podcast coming
to you from the QI offices in Hoburn. My name is Dan Treiber. I am sitting here with
James Harkin, Andrew Hunter Murray, and Ella Alshamahi. And once again, we have gathered
around the microphones with our four favorite facts from the last seven days. And in no
particular order here we go. Starting with fact number one, and that is Ella. So my fact
this week is that 50,000 years ago, humans the size of penguins hunted elephants the
size of cows. Pretty cute. It's cute. The past is cuter than I was led to believe. How
tall are you? You're quite he's two penguins. Yeah, you are about to hunt an elephant the
size of a cow. No way. You couldn't hunt a cow the size of a cow. cows are big. I'm
scary. That's scary. If I get to a field, we're off topic already. But if you get to
a field with a cow in, you've got to take care. But I think if you're an ancient hominid,
then sometimes you just have to go for these things. Yeah, fear isn't in your vocabulary.
You don't have a vocabulary. You're an ancient hominid. What are they what are they hunting
with? So they're hunting with different kinds of tools. This is those of you haven't worked
it out. It's homophoresiensis who we nickname the hobbit. They're these miniature humans.
There are different species. They live on this one island and they lived lived on this
one island in Indonesia called Flores. And when they were discovered, I remember being
a student at the time. It was like just it was a bombshell. It was a bombshell of discovery.
Because basically they were arguing that these tiny humans were human. And you've got to
imagine they are like literally three and a half feet. So that's one meter tall. Like
the size of a three year old. Yeah, a small penguin. And what is even more fantastical
is that they were on this island with giant Komodo dragons standard, giant rats, giant
Marabu carnivorous storks that are taller than me. So like, you know, six foot, et cetera,
et cetera. And then obviously these miniature elephant called stegodons.
So they and the elephants are the only small things on that. It's really weird how it's
an island to either make things very big or very small island dwarfism. Yeah.
So why do other things get big on islands? Is it because there's no predators and they
can. So the theory with island dwarfism is the large animals get small because they have
fewer resources. And small animals get large because they have fewer predators. And it's
called island dwarfism, sometimes island gigantism, depending on your position. It's the same.
It's the same biological phenomenon that we think is happening. So cool. But to see it
with humans is wild. So I was trying to picture what height a penguin is because there's lots
of different sizes. Yeah, that's right. So if you want to picture it at home as a possible
equivalent, picture an Ewok from Star Wars, picture a goblin from the movie Labyrinth.
Any real things? Yes. Professor Flitwick from Harry Potter, if you're familiar. Well, can
you can you work out the thread that I'm doing here? They all play by the same person. Warwick
Davis. Warwick Davis is three foot seven. Is he Warwick or Warwick? I think he's Warwick.
What did I say? Warwick. And also, is it Professor Flitwick or Flitic? Because there's a place
called Flitic. It is Flitwick, but Warwick. I can see why we've got confused. Let's all
calm down. Well, okay. So it's the same height as Warwick Davis. He's three foot seven. And
that's roughly the same height. I'm just saying it's a teeny bit taller than the hobbit. Well,
1.1 meter. Yeah, it's like it's like one. Yeah, it's not much. One inch. Yeah, it's very
tight. I mean, if you're three and a half feet, I'm sorry, one inch is a big deal. That's
true. Sure. Sure. But I thought there were penguins back in the day that were as tall
as Kylie Minogue is now. So she's, what, five foot? She's five and a bit. Yeah. Okay. Five
two maybe. So I'm sure that's right, isn't it? So that these little guys are yours. That's
interesting. She's five two. Yeah. Don't hold me to that, but she's about five. You're
the Australian in the family. Do you cover a lot of this in your new series? Yeah, we
were looking at Ewoks. Okay. So this series human that's, it's going out right now on
BBC iPlayer, also Americans, if you're listening, it goes on on PBS. One of the interesting
things that was happening is that I was so aware of all the politics that goes on behind
the scenes with these new discoveries, but it doesn't necessarily make the cut of, of
you know, a landmark science series. So for example, one of the things that happened when
they first announced these, these hobbit species is that there were like showdowns in anthropology
conferences, like people screaming at each other because there was absolute disbelief.
These are massive names in paleoanthropology. As in how did we miss, how could you miss
this in the fossil record? Like this is not a new species of human. This is just a homo sapien
with microcephaly. And when you say new species of human, I'm sorry to be dense, but it could
be just a small one of us homo sapiens. Yeah. Yeah. So, so the thing that we think now is
that it's a different species of human, just like a Neanderthal or, you know, one of these
other species of human. However, when they first announced it, it was so shocking to
people that there was a human with a brain the size of a chimpanzee, a brain the size
of orange. The size of a chimpanzee's brain. There we go. Thank you very much. Thank you.
Weirdly, Kylie Minogue has a brain the size of a full chimpanzee. Yeah. All right. Yeah.
People couldn't fathom the idea that these humans were able to walk upright while making
stone tools, were possibly using fire, but had brains the size of grapefruits or oranges.
And so they were just, they were showdowns. Like people would, I remember being at one
conference in America where these big professors were screaming at each other. Really? Can I
ask a question? Is it now everyone agrees that it's a new species or are there still
some outliers who say now it's wrong? No, it's pretty much everybody accepts. I mean,
I'm sure there are a few, but they've found too many examples of it from very different
time periods. This also wasn't the only showdown, by the way. Because when it, when this started
happening, one of the scientists who's part of the discovery in New Zealand are called
Brent Allaway. He started going on tour talking about this and the word hobbit started being
used immediately and he effectively got a cease and desist from Tolkien's estate. Yeah.
Saying you cannot call this hobbit. This is our trademark word because the word pushes,
they might have been joke pushes, but to call it homo hobbitous. Yeah. Right. Right. Like
that was part of, you can't stop scientists from calling things what they want.
That's what people were saying. Things crazy thing. No, but Hobbit hit like, so Brent
Allaway was saying, this is a word that's in the dictionary now. Like it's gone beyond
this bit of fiction. Also Dickens use the word hobbit because hobbit was an existing
word. I didn't know that. Well, he didn't use it for an animal, but it was for like
weight of barley if you were selling it. It was a unit of measurement. Yeah. Cause Tolkien
was a bit hack like that. Wasn't he? Say that again? Who's it? Sam? What's he called?
Samwise Gamgee. Gamgee is the name of a dressing for first aid or something. Like he got lots
of his words from like unusual English words. Yeah. And I think there's even folklore where
Hobbit is connected to a creature as well. Okay. Even further back. So it's not like
he invented it, but yeah, he had to stop calling it that. So actually we've run into that problem.
Really? Yeah. So we have to be careful in how we use the word hobbit. If it's a purely
marketing exercise, it's, it's, we've got to be really careful. Wow. Well, we're a podcast.
So hobbit, hobbit, hobbit, hobbit. That's crazy. Yeah. Yeah. And I feel really conflicted
about it because I was brought up in Birmingham right next to some of the oratory and a bunch
of other kind of buildings where, which Tolkien based, as I think there's all this love for
Tolkien. Come on. A lot of Mordor was based on. Yeah. Literally. All right, all right.
I think it's a good case. So like big feet, they do have big feet, right? The flores.
Yes. Relative to their, relative to their legs. So if you looked at their feet on their
own, you wouldn't necessarily think, oh, those are massive feet. But when you understand
that the legs are really short, you're like, okay, relatively those feet. So they live
underground. These ones are all found in a cave. They might have been sheltering maybe
not skilled rock throwers. Hobbits are in the book. Are they? Hobbits are. Yeah. And
these guys, they use stone tools. Yeah. There we go. The archaeologist in me is dying right
now. The idea that like stone tools and lithics are just throwing objects. Are they resilient
against dark magic? You're a lot. Were they friends with the elves? Are any of you guys
going to bring up the local legend? No. Okay, go on. You say it because I've spoken loads.
No, are they still around? Because look, it's a small and densely occupied island. Yeah.
But there have been strange rumors of little things in the underground with big feet. Small
man with big feet. There's a professor called Gregory fourth. He studied them for about
40 years. And a few of the local people, he the Leo people he'd spoken to said they'd
seen one of these things more than one more than one. Yeah. And over to my cryptid colleague.
Well, yeah, he wrote this book between ape and human and he says the Leo people constantly
say yes, these what you're describing are still out there. 30 different people have
said that that they're still out there. But you obviously probably think not. And so do
I just for the record. He's pointing at me. The scientist in the room destroying all joy.
Okay, so when they first announced the discovery of the hobbit, this folklore was talked about
a lot, a lot, a lot, because people were basically saying, look, the description. And what was
it? It was something like this, the small big feet, resistant to dark magic. Love a
second breakfast. You could chuck the hell out of a rock. No, I mean, it matches the
description basically to what they're saying with height and a type of human that are not
like us.
Take our question, Ella, did humans, homo sapiens and florensis ever hang out together?
Okay, so there's two things. One is, with regards to that legend, people were basically
saying, look, is it possible that them still living on the island feels far fetched, but
it's it's oral tradition being passed on over some generations. When they first discovered
the hobbit or homo florensis, they did think that they died out about 17,000 years ago.
So 17,000 years ago, some long time. But is that really unfathomable to think that an
oral tradition would be passed down as possible. But now they think, but then they redid the
dates and they actually think that a homo florensis died out around 50,000 years ago. So it does
become a bit more far fetched. However, we truthfully don't know how long oral tradition
and memory is retained within human communities. 50,000 years is that's a stretch, but we
truthfully have no single data point.
And there were humans living there around that time.
So yeah, for around 50,000 years, we think we turned up. So if you if you look at the
actual archaeological layers, you've got loads of the hobbit. And then basically there's
this massive volcanic eruption, the hobbits and their stone tools disappear. And then
on top of that, we turn up. So you can argue that they went extinct and then we turned
up. I think it's more accurate to say they were on their last leg. And then we turned
up.
Yeah, I read that there was maybe a problem that volcanoes might cause climate change.
They had to move to the edge of the island. And when you move to the edge of the island,
you're going to come across seafaring homo sapiens. And then they might kill you off.
The final blow came from humans, but like you say, of course, we don't know.
But it feels powerfully convenient, doesn't it? Like the way homo sapiens turns up everywhere
and all other large mammals die mysteriously, very shortly, like the ground slots in South
America and the giant kangaroos in Australia, like it's yeah, that whole narrative is really
contested within paleo. But I just find it really, it's a pattern. So it's every single
case, yes, individually, every single data point you can take apart and you can go, well,
technically, there's not enough evidence, but then as a collective whole when you look
at the planet and you see that that is just a pattern, we turn up low and behold, everything
else disappears. You kind of go, Oh, come on, guys, like, okay,
we just might be just really bad luck.
Yeah, yeah, Norman Bates is just a normal motel owner and people haven't keep going missing.
No, it's not his fault. He's just going to fix something with an axe work trip. Oh, no,
killed another. So you saying that they're still here? Is that what you're saying?
Do you think, Ella, there are more potential human species out there that we haven't found
in the fossil record? Oh, yeah, we were like having massive discussions
in in the series about what number to give, because I was like, there was more than the
magnificent seven. Are there a few already found that are waiting
for approval? Yeah, waiting for approval. I love that. I don't know what you think goes
on in paleoanthropology like this at the Natural History Museum. There's a man who sits there
and you come to him and you present the case that there's a new species.
He stamps the bone. Yeah, approved. But yeah, I reckon that I reckon already
that's an underestimate. I think what you need to do is go to a
part of the world and then work out when humans arrive there and then look in the fossil record
at that exact moment. And then that's how we find them.
Yes, great shout. How small could we get? Like, why are they not people the size of
wasps? Is there no evolutionary advantage to us getting really small?
Can I ask another question that's related to Andy's question? When you look in the
fossil record, you get the lizards and then you get enormous dinosaurs and then you get
sloths and you get enormous sloths and all these animals have enormous versions of them
from history. But why are they not enormous humans?
Do you know what? You sound like my comments section of all of my social media.
Hello, what about what about Giants, Ellie? Keep talking about hobbits. What about Giants?
Why don't you come with Giants? Why are the government holding this from us?
Like, you know how trees can only get so high before gravity stops them?
Do we have a height limit as hominids? See, if I had to hazard a guess, I know
you guys aren't taking this seriously, but... Excuse me.
You might find this hilarious. I think the brain is so expensive and our
brain is already way too expensive. Like, our kids are basically born premature.
Right. Let's be honest, because our brains are too big. So I think if you start looking
at giant humans, that brain would just be so expensive and every take up too much energy
and nightmare for childbirth, blah, blah, blah, just don't think.
I'm not sure how expensive my brain is. I feel like that was a discount deal my parents got.
Okay, it is time for fact number two and that is my fact. My fact this week is that there
is a hugely popular subgenre of science fiction novels called "Mondayn Sci-Fi".
Very good. Some of us might think, "Golf sci-fi is mundane".
Well, we've... Yeah. Listener, something happened in the break just now.
"Mondayn Sci-Fi". This is a sci-fi genre for people who don't like aliens or interstellar travel,
time travel, all the things that are not as it were realistic. "Mondayn Sci-Fi" brings you back
to what is the near future? A lot of people will be saying for whatever books I'm about to say,
"That's not mundane sci-fi. That's hard sci-fi". So there's a little bit of gray area between what
qualifies for each subgenre. Say like the Martian. Andy, where's the Martian? So we make it to Mars,
which is possible. You get stuck there. How do you survive on Mars?
So does that count as mundane? Yeah.
Does it? Even though humans can't go to Mars yet?
Because it's a very achievable near future thing.
So it's not like, you know, I bought a new alarm clock. Like that far in the future,
it's much further than that. Yeah, no. It's trying to take existing technologies
and enhance them too. It's plausible.
It's plausible. Whereas you can't just say, "I whacked on warp drive and went over to Alpha Centauri
for the fatigue" or whatever. So hold on. This community, do they police each other and themselves?
No, but everything has subgenres, right? So if you go into a sci-fi and fantasy shop,
it's easier to be going, "I'm going to head to the hard sci-fi section or I'm going to have, you
know, there's anthropology science fiction that you can go to." It's just a way of bracketing
certain science fiction books together in the way that you would romantic fiction or
Jurassic Park might be another example of mundane sci-fi, a very achievable thing that is
actually happening now where we're taking DNA and we're trying to learn.
No, no, but it's not loopy. Yeah, then like it is the idea of using DNA to get dinosaurs is loopy,
right? It's about where the line is. But it's still science fiction,
isn't it? So it's not like saying that the science is definitely going to work. It's still
science fiction. The word mundane used to mean, and I still use it this way,
anything that's in the universe is mundane and anything that's outside the universe is extra
mundane. Lovely. And it was like used in religious settings. So like we live on the mundane earth,
but heaven, where God is, that's in the extra mundane. And that's the original use of that word.
Because Mundus is the earth. For the earth in Latin, yeah.
Like Contramundum against the earth is precisely. Yeah. In my opinion, anything that's mundane
should be on the earth and anything that's like Andy Weir's The Martian should be extra mundane
because it's off the earth. That's good. That's a sub-sub genre within the mundane genre.
Do you think this conversation is getting mundane? Extra mundane. Well, here's a good
fact to Lobbyn, just going back to the last fact about the height of penguins. So Jurassic Park,
Michael Crichton, the writer of Jurassic Park. Yeah. Janelle Tolly was?
Five two. He was six foot nine. Okay. Imagine, it's like, oh, the writer of Jurassic Park is
going to come in and in walks a fucking dinosaur. Like the guy is the height. Two and a half penguins.
Do you know how women like men who are tall, you know, there's this like thing about,
it's like caused a problem on the dating apps because it now means that like women are just
skewing really tall, whereas if you met people in real life, blah, blah, blah. So what I love
about this is a bunch of us tall women started going around pointing out that leave the tall
men alone because they will die younger. Because statistically they will die younger.
They keep banging their heads on somebody. So the thinking is...
Is it because the gravity collapses their heads into their body?
Asteroids hit them first.
You're basically, there's just more of you for blood circulation and all the rest.
More of your cells that can get cancer. Yeah. And it's just more of it.
But it is wild because like basically tall men have been told their whole lives that they're
better and you've seen all the statistics on, they earn more, they this, that and the other.
And actually they do die younger. Like the plot points...
What height though? What height?
It's just a gradual process.
Oh, okay. And all...
Everything over six to you tend to end up being shagged to death by women who adore tall men.
Yeah, it's a problem.
This mundane sci-fi thing, I think it was written in 2004 as a class of sci-fi writers doing a
sort of thought experiment really, because they were sick of really escapist sci-fi.
They said this doesn't reflect the actual, you know, interests and problems and
fascinating stuff that you do get in civilization these days.
So Jeff Reiman was the only person who put his name to it, he's the only person named on it.
So it's not totally serious, but it did really annoy a lot of people at the time.
Because you'll be amazed here that sci-fi fans get irritated about classification
and genre and all of this stuff.
So there's hard SF, which is like where it's mostly about the science bit of the science fiction.
And arguably Jurassic Park and the Martian sit in between mundane and hard sci-fi.
Yeah, there's soft SF, which is much more about the human, you know.
So even though Dune is kind of about, you know, it's a long time ago and the galaxy far, far away
and all that, it is sort of soft because there's a lot of political stuff.
Is that NSFW, where it's not science fiction for work?
Actually, lots of it these days.
Oh yeah.
But lots of science fiction fans say that sci-fi, they call it skiffy rather dismissively,
they say that's not proper science fiction because that's not based in science.
So Star Wars is not sci-fi, it's just fantasy.
They call what they like SF.
But then people say, what do you like reading?
And they say SF and they say, oh, do you mean sci-fi?
They say, no.
And they say, oh, I like sci-fi too.
And they're like, no, no, no, not sci-fi.
I like SF.
It's a big world out there.
All I'll say is, Andy, is you deal with the emails.
I know.
I write mundane sci-fi.
My first two books are mundane sci-fi.
I would agree with the first half of that.
Thank you.
Thank you so much.
The idea of sci-fi, we have the books are out there, very important.
Scientists read sci-fi because it does help them think differently about the future.
And quite often, as we know from Isaac Asimov books and Arthur C Clarke,
a lot of the predictions of inventions have been made.
And that's not a prediction like a premonition.
People read those books and go, I want to make that.
So companies actually hire sci-fi writers to write specific things for them
so that there might be inventions that can inspire their workers.
There's a bunch of companies that do this.
Hershey's, the chocolate company, hire sci-fi writers to write sci-fi based on.
So then Hershey reads this sci-fi and they think, oh, maybe we could make a chocolate
that orbits the Earth.
Yes, exactly.
That would work on me.
No, I don't think that would work on you three as well.
Like, if you hired in a science fiction writer to describe what the future of this
podcast looks like, I can see you guys being quite a bit.
I see the actual future and it's four of us heads in jars.
Just blathering on about some facts or other.
Yeah.
But they do it and even armies do it.
So the French army, they have a red team and that is,
they've hired six sci-fi writers to try and picture what future warfare will be like.
I'm not just making this up.
This is a real thing.
It's simply about a way of generating ideas, isn't it?
Absolutely.
So they have a team of five or six science fiction writers.
They might be defunct now, but in 2019, they certainly did.
It's a small budget compared with the latest bit of military hardware.
You may as well give it a go.
I completely buy it.
Are they getting the best sci-fi writers to do these jobs?
Or are they getting people who can't sell their books?
Well, that's the question.
What is a good sci-fi writer?
Because you can be, you can have a lot of books, but they could all be terrible,
but they're published.
You might just have one or two crisp early career ones though, which are terrific.
And even though your fiction has moved in a different direction,
those two remain very much present.
Yeah, yeah.
I really admire science fiction writers though, who just go for it.
Like there's a guy, Andy said, thank you, silently.
There's a guy called Lionel Fanthorpe.
He's 90 years old.
Fanthorpe?
Yeah, he's still alive.
He's a retired British priest.
He's also worked as a lecturer, a teacher, a television presenter and a dental technician.
And he has written over 180 sci-fi stories and novels, 89 of which he wrote in a three-year period.
So he was averaging 158 pages every 12 days.
And he was part of a company that was called Badger Books.
And they were just, you know, those classic sci-fi covers where it's really illustrated,
RT, it might be like an alien pointing a laser gun.
They would have those covers commissioned and in some cases already attached to other books.
And they would just take that cover and go, write that.
I like it.
I like that because it's hard to come up with ideas, isn't it?
It is.
Is it?
Yeah.
Anyway, so some of the words in sci-fi, absolute bog standard sci-fi words,
were used for other things in the past.
Okay, so the word starship was used in the 17th century to describe a Southern constellation
of stars, the Argo constellation.
So can you guess what the word blaster meant in the 16th century?
I think that's a young man like out on the tiles.
He's a blaster.
Yeah, no, it's not that.
So it's a bad case of diarrhea.
It's not that either.
It was someone who plays the trumpet.
Oh, nice.
It was a blaster.
Okay.
Do you know what a trek he was in 19th century South Africa?
So it's not someone just walking like a tour guide walker?
Pretty close.
Tracking animals?
No, it's Dan's closer.
It was a group of people who were on a trek.
You would call the whole group a trekky.
Okay.
So it's plural.
What's the singular?
Well, a trekker.
A trekker.
I guess.
And in the 19th century, do you know what Ant-Man meant?
No.
Can you guess?
Was it like pest control?
Someone who would literally come to your house?
The Ant-Man.
The Ant-Man's here.
It was.
It had two meanings in the 19th century.
It was a person who destroys ants' nests or a person who specializes in the study of ants.
Right.
And I'm sure that led to some hilarious mix-ups.
And in the other direction, the word vape,
which now means to smokey cigarettes,
it originally meant to vaporize someone with a weapon.
Oh.
And that was used in sci-fi in the early 20th century.
Great.
And do you know that the word monobrow was first used in science fiction?
Was it?
Yeah.
And it was used 10 years after Frida Kahlo died.
So no one could have called Frida Kahlo a monobrow in her lifetime because the word didn't exist.
We just did Frida Kahlo on a previous episode.
That's why I brought it up.
And I can't believe we didn't know that.
We were just saying monobrow the whole way through and she wouldn't have known the word monobrow.
She wouldn't have known that word.
That's crazy.
That's incredible.
Makes you think.
Yeah.
What does it make you think?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
It's funny, isn't it?
You know, sometimes you don't know your legacy.
Yeah.
So you two, Ella and James, you said you don't read fiction.
Not really.
I mean, I have read some.
Yeah.
But do you think that reading a science fiction text is any different to reading a
standard fiction text like literary fiction?
Do you think the quality of the reading you do will change at all between those?
I feel like probably if I read like some Russian literature,
I feel like I concentrate more.
Okay.
Exactly.
And if I'm reading like I have read Andy Weir's stuff and I feel like I just flick through it a little bit.
So this was a study that was done in 2017.
It was a scientific journal and they presented 150 people, a 1000 word piece of text.
One was someone going into a diner in a small town,
you know, like a sort of standard bit of Americana modern fiction.
And the other was a guy going into a space station galley.
And you know, there's all sorts of weird stuff going on and weird aliens.
And what they found at the time was that people who were given the sci-fi text put way less effort
into reading way less concentration.
But the authors of that study did a separate follow-up two years later and they found they were wrong.
So they then did a better control and experiment where they gave people exactly the same text.
And text one started with my daughter is standing behind the bar polishing a wineglass
against a white cloth and the alternate version just had one word different.
I said my alien.
It said my robot.
My robot.
But apart from that, it was exactly the same.
And people read it with exactly the same concentration and empathy and all the levels of that.
So what does what are we saying here?
I think people read pulpy sci-fi less well by unholstered my laser gun.
But if it was a really well written sci-fi book,
like someone who might have written two sci-fi books earlier in their career,
then you would pay attention to that one.
You'd hope so.
Yeah.
That also just sounds like potentially an obvious interpretation of that is that
they broke our sci-fi the first time around.
Maybe. Yeah. Yeah.
Maybe it was, you know, like it's not even schlock.
Yeah. What James is saying is just that they didn't write very well.
Are we still talking about Andy's books here?
Okay.
It is time for fact number three and that is James.
My fact this week is that 18th century Austrians preserved their dead by shoving twigs up their bum.
Wow.
So you'd put it up your bum in the hope that it would.
Not your own bum.
It was the bum of the dead.
The bum of the dead.
That was the ancient Egyptian book we all wanted to read, wasn't it?
Yeah. So this is a study from this year in the journal Frontiers in Medicine.
And they analysed a mummy in an Austrian village, which is quite well known.
And it was of a priest and it had supposedly done some miracles and stuff.
But one of the things about it is it hadn't decayed very much this body and they wanted to know why.
And so they did a CT scan and they found that the abdomen contained quite a lot of wood chips,
twigs, fabric, zinc chloride, they said was in it.
But zinc chloride wasn't invented at that time.
So I think it must be just like some rocks that had zinc in them.
And that had stopped the inside of the body from rotting,
which had managed to keep the body relatively intact.
And it seems that we don't really know why they did that.
But what it might have been is that they wanted to move the body from one place to another.
And in quite a lot of places around the world, they would try and embalm or preserve a body
a little bit so that you can get it to the burial ground first.
And that might have been what happened here.
So yeah, we don't really know.
It was drawing him from the inside out, basically.
Yeah, like quite often the first thing to go will be your internal fluids will start
rotting away on the inside.
And that's what will help rot away the whole body.
So it's basically a plug?
It's a what, sorry?
It's a plug.
It's a plug, yeah.
I thought it was absorbing though.
I thought it was like putting your phone in rice.
It is a bit like that, yeah.
It's a bit like taxidermy, I would say, that kind of thing.
Yeah.
You know, taking the animal and taking the insides out and shoving stuff up there.
Yeah, you're putting the rice in the phone, actually.
Exactly, that's the difference.
This place where they found the mummy is just over an hour's drive from where all of my family
live in Austria.
This is quite possible.
There's a lot of shribers in the ground with twigs up their ass.
I'm very excited by that.
Talking about famously preserved Austrians, you know, Otsi, you know, they did a DNA,
they did some DNA on him a while back.
And obviously he was accidentally preserved, but they discovered that he had 19 living male relatives
in Austria today.
But in the articles, they always explained that his descendants have not been notified.
And so maybe you're one of the descendants.
Did he have an unusually small brain?
That's a heck of a Jeremy Kyle show where they've done the DNA test on the Iceman.
I think that would be so cool as a TV show to go to all these people and say this is your relative.
Absolutely, yeah.
Is there an inheritance that you're dishing out?
Like, well, it'd just be the seeds from his stomach.
Otsi's leather sandals are finally coming home.
Why haven't they notified them?
I would want to know, wouldn't you want to know?
Absolutely.
Of course.
Yeah, I'm game.
But Ella, like preserving bodies and stuff, you must touch on that in your work occasionally.
So not particularly, because I don't really, I only wake up for bone, not for any soft tissue.
I haven't done that for every time a woman had told me that.
No, but okay.
But I do find this really, really interesting because you often come across accidental preservation
in the kind of stuff that we do, because you'll be at the back of a cave and, you know, or
some of my favorite stories are like, you get somewhere and you think you're the first person
to enter into that particular cave or onto that rock.
And you're like, nah, crap, because basically the ancestors already got there and it's like
their burial ground and they will have like embalmed or, I remember being really intrigued
because I think so often people think that mummification is an Egyptian thing.
But actually, all these cultures around the world have their own mummification process.
And for me, the interesting thing about that is they're clearly using local materials.
So for example, in Yemen, they have a local mummy culture and they used raisins and camel fat.
And as an Arab, I'm like, that sounds kind of quite tasty.
No, that sounds yum.
There's some of that.
That's stuffing, isn't it?
It's basically that I remember reading somewhere that it was,
they described the Yemeni culture as artisanal mummification and artisanal mummification.
Yeah.
What period is this?
Like, as in, are the ancient Egyptians our first example or does it go way further back?
I think the first culture we found it happening really in widespread way is the Chincharo people.
That's Latin America.
Yeah, Chile and Peru.
That's a thousand years before the Egyptians thought of it.
I think everyone got mummified because in Egypt, it was just the nobles, right?
Yeah.
And the Chincharo, they had a, well, see if this is as appealing as raisins and camel fat.
You get your organs removed.
Then they'd be replaced with a paste made of ash, water and sea lion blood.
Oh.
Yeah.
Wow.
And then that same paste is used to make a mask and the model of your sexual organs.
And then you're painted black, polished until you're shiny and given a wig.
Okay.
What state are you in for the genital bit?
You're not feeling good.
You're talking phone or off-picture?
I've seen some of those mummies for sure.
I think they had them in Bolton Museum, I think, for a while at least.
Really?
And they were quite big in the early 20th century, weren't they?
There was one in Paris that was really famous and there's quite a lot of famous works were based on it.
Like, definitely Monk's The Scream was based on, he saw this mummy and thought,
"I'm going to paint something like that."
But the oldest, actual preserved body we have is from Portugal, 8,000 years old.
But again, we think that they just preserved it so they could move it to another burial ground
and then something happened and yeah.
Yeah, wow.
So I was in Edinburgh the other day and I went for a quick drive
out to what is quite a famous chapel called Roslyn Chapel.
Oh, Jesus Christ.
It's a temple.
From the Da Vinci Code.
It's supposedly they were protecting the bloodline of Christ.
It's where the Da Vinci Code culminates in as a thing.
So while we were waiting to-
That I read.
I'm not going to lie, that I read.
I thought it was good, don't judge me.
Yeah, yeah, it's not bad.
But so we were waiting to go in there.
We went to a cafe that's across the road and it was called Dolly's Cafe.
We start noticing lots of sheep imagery and then on the wall are photos of a black and white sheep
and it is Dolly the sheep.
And because it Roslyn Institute right next to it
were the ones who-
Oh, I didn't know that they were related.
Yeah.
So we bumped into a few people and one person told me,
so this is some gossip.
Apparently when Dolly was getting a bit iller and so on and later in age,
they had someone on standby, a taxidermist,
because the idea was they were going to immediately do taxidermy
and take Dolly to one of the museums in Edinburgh.
Right.
And then they went on holiday and while they were away,
somewhere in Corfu or wherever, Dolly died.
And there was a huge scramble to find a local taxidermist
to immediately get to Dolly before it was too late
and they just managed to do it.
Now, this is gossip, you know, I haven't seen.
I've tried-
And pretty hot gossip at that.
We are going to be on the front pages of all the newspapers with this.
We've been trying to go a bit more viral recently, haven't we?
And this is the kind of stuff you're talking about.
Dan, if you're not going there and immediately opening another identical cafe over the road.
You're doing it wrong.
Brilliant.
Here was an interesting thing to do with the Titanic that I've never heard before,
which is that if you were first class on the Titanic,
that actually mattered after the boat had sunk and you had died.
So a boat was chartered to retrieve all of the bodies
and they found way more than they expected.
They found over 300.
Now, the idea was you were only allowed to bring them back
if they were embalmed because health and safety regulations.
Okay.
Unfortunately, they didn't expect to find that many people.
So they only had limited amounts of embalming fluid.
Oh, no.
So the first class passengers largely got priority
and the others had to be left back into the ocean.
It's something you don't think about when you're bucking tickets.
Because you see the prices and it's like first class, I can't do that.
Maybe premium economy.
Do I get any kind of twigs up my ass if I do that or what?
Wow, that's really, oh man.
Yeah.
But how did they tell that passengers were first class
based on them floating?
Responds.
It's the responds.
Identified them.
They identified them.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Wow.
Wowie.
Madness.
Can I lift the mood a bit by talking about Pope Pius XII?
Oh, yes, please.
Right.
So the Vatican has its own embalmer.
Okay.
I imagine it's not a full-time gig.
But it's...
Do they embalm people?
They embalm the Pope.
Did you guys know that?
I assumed that they did.
Yeah.
I've been to the vaults in Vatican and I can't remember a few.
So they're not on display permanently.
They don't enjoy the permanent collection.
But I think there is a...
He's not quite mad of two sards.
It's not.
It's...
Oh, dear.
It's good technique though.
They're quite animatronic as well.
They can bless you as you walk by.
So I think it's for public mourning
so the Pope might be on display for a few days after their death.
And this doesn't happen.
I don't know if it still happened with the recent Pope
after he passed away, but...
So it used to happen that there would be a raised beer
and people would walk by and all of that stuff.
But in 1958, Pope Pius XII died.
And he had his own personal doctor in life
called Riccardo Galliazzillisi.
And he was not a good posthumous doctor.
So point one, he gave photos of the dead Pope to two magazines.
Not cool.
Yeah, what's this?
'58, 1958.
He tried to publish a diary of the Pope's last four days
to kind of get some copy out of it.
He also announced,
"I'm going to be doing something a little bit different
with this Pope's embalming guys."
He said, "I'm not going to be removing his organs,"
which was the traditional way of embalming someone after death.
He said, "I'm going to embody his holiness
in the same way that Christ himself was preserved,
the traditional way using oils and resins."
Okay.
Now, unfortunately, this did not work.
They basically didn't drain any bodily fluids.
They didn't keep the body cold.
It was extremely hot at the time.
They were working in Castel Gandolfo, which is the Pope's...
Oh, Gandolfo, no, never mind.
That's his summer residence in Italy.
Summer residence, exactly.
So it's near the Vatican, but it's not...
It's incredibly hot.
And they just put the body in a bag with some herbs and spices.
And they said this was...
Was it 11 herbs and spices?
We don't know.
But they...
And no raisins, I'm assuming.
They claimed this was aromatic osmosis.
It made things go really wrong.
So when the Pope was on display,
he turned either green or black, the sources vary.
But the Swiss guards who were standing guard
around the coffer, they started fainting.
And they had to change shift every 15 minutes.
Wow.
Like, it was an absolute disaster.
I mean, the doctor Gaby Atselisi was sacked.
I mean, I would hope so.
It was an absolute disaster.
Yeah.
What was he thinking?
I don't know.
I mean, traditional method.
Yeah.
We talked about natural preservation earlier.
In Xinjiang, in China,
you get a few of these preserved people
because it's so dry there
and the sand is so salty.
It's like a desert in central China.
And there's one mummy there, the princess of Zhiyuahe.
And she still has her eyelashes, a hat,
and her natural hair streaming out.
Wow.
Because she's been so well preserved.
So she's in the desert?
She's basically well in the cave in the desert, really.
But it's so dry that bacteria can't really live there.
And so they can't eat up her body.
She was buried with a cheese around her neck
and a wooden penis on her stomach.
That's all you need.
That's all you need in the afterlife.
That's a party at the afterlife.
Let's go.
Any wine?
No, no.
But I do have...
A wooden penis.
It's going to have a quiet night in tonight
with some cheese and a wooden penis.
And that'll be me.
The article that I read said that the cheese
was for sustenance in the afterlife,
but no one knows why she had the wooden penis on her stomach.
Oh, wow.
That is heavy.
Good Lord.
But you know, I think as an anthropologist,
this is what I find really, really fascinating
is the different reasons why so many cultures
around the world would mummify.
So the ancient Egyptians,
it's the idea that you need a body.
You need a body.
So therefore we've got to preserve the body.
You've got some Latin American cultures
where it's more the idea that they're still with you.
And so they get brought out in festivals
because they're still part of the community.
They're still active within the community.
The soul hasn't necessarily gone anywhere.
Other cultures, I'm thinking like, for example,
in Muslim culture, you don't preserve,
you don't, you bury, you don't even cremate
because the idea is that the body feels after death.
But then you've got Hindu culture
where you cremate so that the soul may be released.
Sorry, I just find this absolutely fascinating.
And I think it's partly because we live
in a much more homogenous society today.
So it's like, oh, the body, where is imagine that,
like every community you would turn up to,
they would have a different interpretation
of what the body and soul are doing in the afterlife
and how important the body is
and that relationship between the body and soul is.
And what about like the obvious question
is things like Neanderthals and their hobbits and stuff,
what did they do with their dead?
The Neanderthals, did they, I think,
they buried them and put like gifts there and stuff
or is that really contentious?
So it is contentious.
I think some of them, I find it really hard to interpret
some of those caves where you find a Neanderthal.
I mean, I'm sorry, if you put in a Neanderthal
and there's lots of like palms and talons of other animals,
I'm sorry, guys, what is that other than grave offerings?
- Ritual, yeah. - It's really hard to interpret.
But it is, it's not like it's very common,
but the most famous example of it,
or the first really famous example was in Iraq,
in Shannadar cave.
And they thought what they were finding
was flowers being put on the grave
because they were finding pollen.
And it was like, it was, you know,
they were described as the flower people.
It was the first time people were like,
maybe Neanderthals are,
well, it's the first serious time people were like,
Neanderthals might have been emotional
and might have, you know,
had a sense of the afterlife and blah, blah, blah.
And then they were like, actually, it might just be rodents.
Rodents might have just come in
and basically brought pollen with them
and be ruining an archaeological site.
And it's like this beautiful kind of poetic story
that had been presented to the public.
And then another bunch of scientists were like,
actually, we think it's just rodents.
Is that a problem like in your industry
where you just get enticed by a good start?
Not you, but people just get enticed by it.
Absolutely.
So I actually worked on that in that cave.
And I have to say, you could see those animal burrows.
It was really, really clear.
But it's still not, I would say,
it's still not conclusive one side or the other.
What if it was trained microelephants
who were mourning in their own way
by bringing in the flowers?
Is that brilliant sci-fi brain working again?
Sorry to think outside the box here.
Sorry, the French army are calling me again.
(laughing)
If you could only be buried with a--
What's in your life?
Which cheese are you choosing to be buried with?
Along with your, to go with your wooden penis.
For the afterlife.
Yeah, you can get one cheese and a wooden penis.
But what's the cheese?
For me, it has to be Lancashire, like where I'm from.
Lovely.
Nice crumbly Lancashire reminds me of my body crumbling away.
That's really nice.
And the archaeologist will be able to have some fun with that.
You know, they'll be like, he was probably from Lancashire.
Yeah.
I think probably a lot of Lancashires
might have been buried with cheese,
or it could have been my springing them.
My slice of cheese.
You Andy, obviously you wouldn't have asked this question
if you didn't have your own hilarious answer.
Probably a reasonably soft cheese,
but nothing too adventurous, you know.
For the afterlife.
Which penis would you like to be buried with?
Take the XL.
I had the theory that she was actually holding a bottle of wine
and it was like Indiana Jones,
where someone was trying to take the wine
but thought they'd be booby trapped.
Have we got anything around here?
We got that Gladys, give us.
Come on.
Yeah.
Okay, well, we've all got theories.
Okay, it is time for our final fact of the show,
and that is Andy.
My fact is, halfway through the summer,
wasps switch from liking ham to liking jam.
This is brilliant.
And when did they start liking lamb?
Oh, lamb.
It goes ham, it goes ham, jam, lamb, spam.
Well, basically wasps are just written by Dr. Seuss,
it turns out.
Like they're just, so this has been a terrific year for wasps,
we should say.
Is it?
We should say.
It's been warm and dry, good conditions for wasps,
and also great year for butterflies,
but we're not talking about them.
So wasps have a very different kind of food choice,
depending on what time of year it is.
So in the early part of the summer,
what they're trying to do is feed their larvae,
and wasp larvae are all carnivorous, right?
So wasps will be looking for ham.
If you're at a picnic and you've got some meat out,
wasps will be going drawn to the smell of that,
and they'll take bits off it and back to their brood.
And then halfway through the summer,
the larvae pupate, they go into the pupa,
they don't need food anymore,
they're dealt with.
So the worker wasps think,
well, I'm going to turn to feeding myself.
And wasps, they have that tiny waste,
you know, they've got an incredibly divided body,
they can only really have a liquid diet,
and that's when they will go for jam,
or lemonade or whatever it is.
So you can tell what time of summer it is,
simply by putting out a sausage and some jam,
and seeing which the wasps go.
Do you have a date?
Because some people like this will go out
towards the end of the summer,
people will be going on picnics,
they need to know whether to bring the sausage rolls out there.
I think by the time this goes out,
what most wasps are going to be on the jam.
So you'll be safer with the ham.
But UCL, the scientists at UCL are doing a survey,
there's an online survey,
if you Google wasp ham jam survey,
you'll probably find it.
What's the survey?
They're trying to find out,
like, have you been out recently at a picnic and noticed what?
So this is new science,
they're still asking for people to send in.
Yeah, contributions are being welcomed.
This is a citizen science thing, basically.
And I tried to fill it in,
because recently I was out with a piece of sponge cake,
and the wasps were absolutely bananas for it.
But unfortunately, I didn't bring my sausage,
so my contribution is useless to science.
What I love about this is the idea that you wake up from a coma,
and instead of being like, "What's the date?"
You're like, "Are the wasps after the ham?"
But isn't that great to know that if that did happen,
you can work that out?
Yeah, that's really cool.
There was a bit of advice as well that I read,
that if you are out eating,
let's say the four of us are out having a picnic,
and I'm making plates for us with whatever food,
I'll make the four plates for us,
you should always make a fifth plate,
in case there are wasps around.
An offering.
An offering plate.
Sorry, how do the wasps know to go for that one,
and not the four plates?
So there you go, make four to begin with,
and then if a wasp lands in it and starts eating yours,
basically a wasp will return to the same plate.
So you've just got to go, "Okay, that's your plate now,"
and you put it aside.
So they tend to return to where they started eating.
So then they won't bother you, put their plate over there,
and get on with them.
I went camping this weekend,
and the wasps around me only went for my wine.
So I wonder what type of year that was.
That feels like sugar.
Unless you were having delicious meat wine,
it feels like that's a late summer thing for them.
What's interesting about that is,
there are also some people wasps go after them more.
Yes.
Then like, I'm one of, like, but wasps will tend to,
not always, but there are some people who clearly,
you know, there'll be four people having a picnic,
and they're going after one person.
I wonder if some people have, like, a more meaty odor.
No, I wonder.
You're a jammy.
Yeah.
I dumped too much perfume on myself this morning,
and I was, like, in my head.
I'm just like, "Is that the kind of thing that, you know,
would be, like, that's what we're going for?"
Because they're not, they're certainly not trying to eat you.
No.
They don't eat live animals, basically.
Are you wearing sausage from Chanel?
Yeah.
Yeah, but they, do they not go for live, like, insects and stuff?
Because I thought, like, the whole point of wasps
is they bury their eggs in animals, don't they?
This is the thing.
There are so many species that you can't be,
you can't really be general about all wasps.
Like, some wasps, the classic wasps that we have,
the yellow jackets, no.
They go for carrion and a bunch of wasps
and strip a rat to the bone in a few hours.
They can really do it.
I know.
But yeah, you're right.
Loads of them go for live.
And basically, the difference between a bee and a wasp
is that a bee is veggie.
So, I just want to give a shout out to the scientists
behind this research from UCL, the Ham Jam Survey,
because she's called Sirian Sumner,
Professor Sirian Sumner.
She's written a book called Endless Forms,
which is all about wasps.
And the first, I'd say, two chapters are predominantly
slagging off bees and saying, "Everyone loves bees, don't they?
Oh, they're so cute."
And people, basically, people search how to save the bees
and how to destroy the wasps.
Like, people, like, and she's just sticking up for the wasps.
She says bees are just wasps that have forgotten
how to hunt devastating.
Oh, my God, that's amazing.
Bees are veggie.
Bees are fluffy.
They do honey.
And actually, wasps are incredibly useful
in all sorts of ways.
They deal with tons and tons of pests
in your garden every year.
Yeah, we'd be overrun with pests if it wasn't for wasps.
But they are pests themselves, so...
Well, you know, we're getting into it.
Take it up with Professor Sumner.
But that's really interesting.
Our book is unbelievably good,
all about the sheer variety of wasps
that she think that hornets.
I think she's pro.
She's pro anything wasp bees.
I don't think that's not a bee.
Yeah.
The thing with the wasp wasp thing is really interesting.
So, basically, you're saying that they end up
with a liquid diet because they've got these tiny wasps.
Yeah.
So, when I first looked into the difference
between wasps and bees, I did think that's a little bit
like Neanderthals and Homo sapiens.
Because we have wasps.
Neanderthals don't have wasps.
Neanderthals' ribcage just keeps going out.
So, it's like us after Christmas.
Like, it just keeps going.
Wow.
We have wasps.
Yeah.
And then we're not particularly hairy.
Now, we don't really know what Neanderthals are,
but I guess Hollywood would tell you that they're hairy.
But yeah, I was just laughing that we are the wasps
of the equation.
Yes.
So, our wasps are the ribcage stops and then the...
No.
So, if you look at a ribcage on Homo sapiens,
the bottom ribs go in.
Like, think of an image of a skeleton.
The ribs go in at the end at the bottom.
Whereas on Neanderthals, they just keep going out.
So, they technically...
Yeah. So, they don't have wasps.
Interesting.
So, does that make them less flexible?
I mean, it makes them stockier.
Okay.
It makes them stockier.
So, like...
There'd be a good prop forward.
Right.
And Homo sapiens would be a good...
Winger.
What's interesting is actually the first TV show I ever...
Listener, he did not understand.
I think I know enough about football to understand.
What's brilliant about that is the first TV show I ever did was...
It's called Neanderthals Meet Your Ancestors,
but it's actual original title for the first godness,
how many years was Neanderthal Fight Club?
And it's because the whole premise was who would win
in a fight between the Neanderthals and the Homo sapiens,
because the Neanderthals are so stocky.
So, they were describing as like Joe Frazier and Muhammad Ali,
which, by the way, that went like people were talking about it
in pitches all the time.
And I was like, I should probably Google who the hell is Neanderthal.
There's no idea what boxing is about.
But yeah, that stockiness, that does change how you stand,
how you hold yourself.
And who would win in a fight?
We decided that it would be equal, because the Neanderthals would be...
The Neanderthals would be kind of just like heavy set, blah blah blah, but then the agility of the Homo sapiens would be like light on their feet, like Muhammad Ali.
We have tested this in a global sense.
The results are in.
But just the waist thing, the benefit of that wasp's narrow waist,
which bees don't have, stupid bees,
is that it makes wasps very agile in terms of moving the lower half around.
So originally wasps didn't have stings.
They had ovipositors, egg-laying tubes.
And those have to be flexible, they have to be able to move and shift,
because you might be laying an egg on a live host organism, that kind of thing.
So the wasps back end can move around.
Their stings are very flexible and pointable, and that's a big advantage for them.
And that's why only female wasps sting you, right?
Because the sting is a egg-laying organ.
Really?
But new research, they found males that can sting with their genitals, or kind of.
So these are potter wasps.
Potter?
Potter, yeah, like Harry.
And they've evolved sharp spines on their genitals.
And when they're swallowed by a frog, they'll use their genitals to kind of stab the mouth of the frog,
so that it lets them go.
This is the first evidence that we have of the defensive role of male genitalia
in the whole animal kingdom.
Wow!
So they're the only animals that we know of that are using their penises as a defense mechanism.
Wow, wow.
And that's huge.
Apparently, I don't know if it's huge.
Apparently, this has been anecdote from people out in the fields,
talking about that they could do this.
And one person who had been saying it for years was Schmidt.
Justin Schmidt.
Schmidt pain index.
I believe so, unless it's a different Schmidt, but he wrote...
How did Justin Schmidt...
Ella doesn't know who Justin Schmidt is, I don't think.
Who is Schmidt?
And possibly one or two of our listeners might not know.
Yeah, we were actually like, he's an old friend, sorry.
Justin Schmidt was a guy who decided to find out where on the body was the most painful to be stung
and by what?
Insects and animals and so on.
And so he had the Schmidt index.
He was the one who found out how bad the tarantula hawk sting is,
which is the worst kind of wasp sting.
It was actually someone who he worked with who got stung by the tarantula hawk
and he said that the pain was so great, he crawled into a ditch and bawled his eyes out.
Wow.
He wrote really poetic descriptions, didn't he?
His papers are just outstanding.
Bullet and someone is pouring lava into your ear.
You know, all of these amazing descriptions of what it's like being stung by these things.
The most dangerous wasp, in my opinion.
Come on.
The mud dauber, so the mud dauber is sometimes called the pipe organ dauber
and they make nests out of clay and they're like, they're shaped a bit like pipe organs,
so they're kind of cylindrical, long cylindrical things.
But they have a bit of a habit of making them inside aeroplanes
and the nests have caused the crashing of at least three planes causing the death of 200 people.
Oh my god.
By these wasps.
Really?
Yeah.
Oh my god.
Wow.
You've got to check your plane for wasp nests.
Yeah.
Yeah, I'm not, I'm not blaming the wasps.
They didn't know what they were doing, I have to say, but you know.
Interesting, because like the captain will have the door closed, right?
So are they coming through cracks?
What are they coming through?
Because that's the only person you need to affect to make the plane crash.
No, no, sorry.
They're building nests in the engines which cause the engines to fail.
Oh, they're not stinging them to death.
They're not stinging them to death.
What's going on?
Oh, there was like snakes on a plane.
That's what wasps in the cabin.
Wow.
Sorry.
You just check out the passenger in 3B.
I think he's a million wasps.
I'm not sure.
I thought he was 3Bs.
Ladies and gentlemen, unfortunately we're out of fish and chicken.
Today's meal will be sausage or jam.
No.
Okay, that's it.
That is all of our facts.
Thank you so much for listening.
If you'd like to get in contact with any of us about the things that we've said
over the course of this podcast, we're all online.
I'm on Instagram.
I'm on @Shrieberland.
James.
My Instagram is @narsichthings.
James Harkin.
Andy.
My Instagram is @andrewhunderem.
Yeah.
And Ella.
Ella_Alchamahi.
And also WatchHuman on BBC and PBS.
Yeah, so PBS, what's the exact date for the Americans?
17th of September when we start going out.
Very exciting.
And then if you're in Britain, it's on the iPlayer.
So do check it out.
Also, if you want to write to us, there's other means of getting to us.
Podcast@qi.com.
You can send your emails there.
Andy checks all of those.
Some of those emails will make it to Drop Us a Line.
Bonus episode that we do is part of our Secret Members Club, Club Fish.
So go to our website, narsichthingasafish.com.
You'll find a link to it there.
You'll find all the previous episodes there as well.
Some bits of merch.
Otherwise, why not just come back next week?
Because we will be back with another episode.
We will see you then.
Goodbye.
[BLANK_AUDIO]